hey this is presto Walker reminding you
to mind your decisions the International
mathematical olympiad or IMO for short
is an annual competition for pre-college
students more than 100 countries
participate and each country sends a
team of its six elite math competitors
on the first day students solve three
questions in four and a half hours and
on the second day they solve another
three questions in four and a half hours
each problem is worth seven points for a
total of 42 points in 2019
the individual mean score was about 16
points but there were students who got a
perfect paper with 42 points this
problem comes from day one question 1
let Z be the set of integers determine
all functions f going from Z to Z such
that for all integers a and B f of 2 a
plus 2 times f of B is equal to F of F
of a plus B now while this is an
incredibly challenging problem for most
of us about 60% of these competitors
scored a perfect 7 points on this
problem for them this was an easy
problem but for the rest of us this is a
very challenging problem and in this
video I want to give some indication of
how you can solve it pause the video if
you'd like to give it a try and when
you're ready keep watching to learn how
to solve this problem
[Music]
so I'll admit I wasn't able to solve
this problem myself so I want to thank
the art of problem solving community
been iboga cells blog and the red Pig
YouTube channel
I read solutions on these places and it
helped me understand how to present it
for you so how can we solve for all
functions over the integers such that
this equality is true now solving this
problem is a little bit like giving
directions from point A to point B
you're gonna have to calculate a lot of
different routes until you figure out a
good way to go from A to B just like a
GPS will show you the shortest path or a
path that's easier to understand I'm
going to just present the solution to
you as if we've already done all the
experimentation there may be other
easier ways but this is just one way
that I hope you'll understand so we'll
get started by trying some special
values suppose a is equal to zero we'll
take this equation and we'll substitute
in a is equal to zero we get f of 0 plus
2 times F of B is equal to F of F of 0
plus B 0 plus B simplifies to BB next
we'll consider that this is true for all
integers B therefore we can substitute
the variable X here and say it's true
for all integers X now let's try the
special value a is equal to 1 so we take
our identity and then substitute a is
equal to 1 1 plus B will be B plus 1
because addition is commutative we're
now going to take this F of f of B plus
1 and simplify it how can we do that
well look at our first identity we have
a composition of f of f of X so we
substitute in B plus 1 wherever we see X
and we end up with F of 0 plus 2 times F
of B plus 1 so this will become another
identity now recall that this is true
for all integers B so we'll substitute X
here and we'll just write that it's true
for all integers X now we're going to
manipulate this equation we have a neck
term on the left and a constant term on
the right so we'll switch them to the
other side
we'll bring the constant term to the
left side and the X term to the right
side now we'll divide both sides of this
equation by 2
notice the right-hand side of the
equation will be the difference of
consecutive terms this is f of X plus 1
minus f of X the left-hand side of the
equation will be the value of the
function at 2 minus the value of the
function at 0 all divided by 2
therefore this will be a constant value
and it's true for all integers X this
means we have an arithmetic progression
because the difference of consecutive
terms will be some constant value this
means f of X can be written as the
linear equation M times X plus n we now
take this form and substitute it back
into the original equation we start with
F of 2a then we go to 2 times F of B and
finally we have a composition so first
let's do F of a plus B then let's do
another evaluation of the function when
we do that we end up with the following
equation we simplify both sides and now
how are we going to figure out m and n
we're going to match coefficients of
like terms so here we have the term a
plus B on the left and a plus B on the
right and this has to be true for all
integers a and B the only way this is
true is if we match the coefficients to
M and M Squared
now we also match the constant terms so
we have 3 n is equal to M times n plus n
we have a system of equations we're
going to solve this by considering each
case so how do we solve to M is equal to
M Squared well one solution is M is
equal to 0 we're going to substitute
that into our second equation we have 3
n is equal to n and that's only true if
n is equal to 0 the other possibility is
that M is equal to 2 in this case we
substitute it in and get 3 n is equal to
n
so n can be any integer and we now have
two possibilities for our solution one
will be f of X is equal to zero and the
other is that f of X is equal to two
times X plus N for some integer n in Z
we want to verify that these actually
are true and substitute them back into
our original equation we can do that and
we'll see that we'll get equality for
both cases therefore these are the only
solutions either f of X is identically 0
or f of X is equal to 2 times X plus n
for some constant n I hope this video
gave you some sense of how to solve an
Olympiad problem and I hope it gave you
some idea of how challenging these
problems are because the competitors
found this problem to be on the easy
side thanks for watching and for making
mind your decisions one of the best
channels on YouTube thanks for watching
and thanks for your support
[Music]